### Introduction<a name="introduction">


### Installation via nuget
```sh
install-package dependable
```
### Creating a job
Dependable jobs are convention based. Simply create class with a method named ```Run``` and return type of ```Task```.

```csharp
public class BackgroundJob 
{
    public async Task Run()
    {        
    }
}
```

### Creating a scheduler
You will need a scheduler to run your jobs. Use ```DependableConfiguration``` to create one. Typically you would run this code during application start-up and store this instance as a static instance.

```csharp
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration().CreateScheduler();
scheduler.Start();
```

### Scheduling jobs
Once scheduler is started, you can schedule your jobs using ```Schedule()``` method.

```csharp
scheduler.Schedule<BackgroundJob>();
```

### Jobs with arguments
Run method can receive one argument of any type. Then you can specify the argument while scheduling. Currently, if you want to pass multiple values to the job, you will need to create a type wrapping them up.

```csharp
public async Task Run(string token) { }

scheduler.Schedule<BackgroundJob>("my token value");
```

## Configuration
That's all pretty basic. Let's look at how to leverage Dependable's reliability features.

### Retry
When a job fails, you can configure to retry them. Retry configuration takes place in two places. Firsly you need to tell depdendable how many times you should retry and interval used calculate the due time. You can configure these values globally for all jobs or for specific ones or both.

```csharp
// Setting retry settings globally
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration()
                    .SetDefaultRetryCount(1)
                    .SetDefaultRetryDelay(TimeSpan.FromSeconds(5))
                    .CreateScheduler();

// Setting retry settings for a specific job
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration()
                    .Job<BackgroundJob>(c => c
                        .WithRetryCount(1)
                        .WithRetryDelay(TimeSpan.FromSeconds(5))                        
                    )
                    .CreateScheduler();
```


Scheduler periodically scans for due items and executes the ready ones. By default this scanning process takes place once every minute. However, you can change that in the configuration.

```csharp
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration()
                    .SetRetryTimerInterval(TimeSpan.FromSeconds(5))
                    .CreateScheduler();
```

### Detecting retry attempts
Sometimes it's essential for a job to know if it has been executed for the first time or not. ```Run``` method can receive an argument of type ```JobContext``` which contains the ```DispatchCount``` property indicating how many times the job has been executed.

```csharp
public async Task Run(string token, JobContext context)
{
    if(context.DispatchCount > 0)
    {   
        // do something special
    }
}    
```

### What to do when all bets are off
Sometimes no matter how many times you attempt to run a job, it could always end-up failing. When maximum number of retry count is reached for a job, dependable will consider it as a poisoned job. If you would like to do something when a job becomes poisoned you could simply add a function called ```Poison``` which returns a ```bool```. Later we will see how return value of this function can be used to do some cool stuff but for the time being let's say we always return false.

Similar to ```Run``` method, ```Poison``` method can receive optional arguments. If you ask for ```JobContext```, you can check ```Exception``` property for the exception causing the job to poison.

```csharp
// Simple Poison function
public bool Poison() { return false; }

// Poison function with job state
public bool Poison(string token) { return false; }

// Poison function with context
public bool Poison(JobContext context) { return false; }

// Poison function with both job state and context
public bool Poison(string token, JobContext context) { return false; }
```
One small caveat you have to be aware of when using ```JobContext.Exception``` is that it always contains the exception occurred during last job execution and in rare cicumstances may not be available. Later we will explore another feature that can reliably give you complete visibility to job's lifecycle.

### Long running workflows and that compensation problem
Dependable setup we've seen so far works well for simple jobs we want to run in the background. Truth is things are not always that simple. Sometimes background processing can involve running multiple jobs in a certain order. Sounds like a 'workflow' right? Exactly! To make things worse, sometimes we want to compensate for the jobs we completed higher up in the workflow if something goes wrong down below. Well the good news is, you can now let Dependable handle the hairy coordination problem and focus on individual job implementations.

To spin-up a child job once a job is completed, you simply change your ```Run``` method's return type from ```Task``` to ```Task<Awaiter>``` or ```Task<IEnumerable<Awaiter>>```. 

```csharp
// Wait for one job
public async Task<Awaiter> LongRunningJob()
{
    return Awaiter.For<AnotherLongRunningJob>();
}

// Wait for more than one job
public async Task<IEnumerable<Awaiter>> LongRunningJob()
{
    return new [] 
        { 
            Awaiter.For<ChildJobA>(), 
            Awaiter.For<ChildJobB>() 
        };  
}
```

Let's take a look at a more concrete example. Imagine we are building a travel booking system and we have the following Job setup to process a booking request.

```csharp
public class BookTrip
{
    public async Task<IEnumerable<Awaiter>> Run(BookingDetails details)
    {
        return new[] 
        {
            Awaiter.For<BookFlight>(details.Flight),
            Awaiter.For<BookHotel>(details.Hotel),
            Awaiter.For<BookCar>(details.Car)
        };
    }
}

public class BookFlight
{
    public async Task Run(Flight flight)
    {
    }
}

public class BookHotel
{
    public async Task Run(Hotel hotel)
    { 
    }
}

public class BookCar
{
    public async Task Run(Car car)
    {    
    }
}
```

Now if any one of these bookings fail, we probably would want to cancel the successfully completed bookings (reality of this process is probably lot more involved than that, but let's assume this is the case for the purpose of this discussion).

To notify Dependable that successful jobs should be compensated, ```BookFlight```,  ```BookHotel``` and ```BookCar``` jobs can implement the ```Poison``` method and return ```true```.

In addition to that, each one of those jobs will also have a new method called ```Compensate``` with logic for reversing the action it performed. Our modified jobs will look like this:

```csharp
public class BookTrip
{
    public async Task<IEnumerable<Awaiter>> Run(BookingDetails details)
    {
        return new[] 
        {
            Awaiter.For<BookFlight>(details.Flight),
            Awaiter.For<BookHotel>(details.Hotel),
            Awaiter.For<BookCar>(details.Car)
        };
    }
}

public class BookFlight
{
    public async Task Run(Flight flight)
    {
    }

    public book Poison() { return true; }

    public void Compensate(Flight flight)
    {
    }
}

public class BookHotel
{
    public async Task Run(Hotel hotel)
    { 
    }

    public book Poison() { return true; }

    public void Compensate(Hotel hotel)
    {
    }
}

public class BookCar
{
    public async Task Run(Car car)
    {    
    }

    public book Poison() { return true; }

    public void Compensate(Car car)
    {
    }
}
```

### Tracking
You don't want to kick off background work and hope for the best. Dependable provides a comprehensive view of your job execution with an extensible framework to get that information in a monitoring system of your like. We will look at these extensibility options in a later section and for now you can enable built-in console based monitoring in the configuration.

```csharp
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration()
                    .UseConsoleEventLogger()
                    .CreateScheduler();                    
``` 

Sometimes events emitted by Dependable could be too verbose and you may be only interested in certain kind of events. You can configure ```ConsoleEventLogger``` to log just the events you are intersted in.

```csharp
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration()
                    .UseConsoleEventLogger(EventType.JobStatusChanged | EventType.Exception)
                    .CreateScheduler();                    
``` 

## Persistence
Dependable has a built-in volatile persistence store. This is great if you don't want to recover jobs after a system failure. If you want your jobs to resume even after an event like that you could use a extension to persist jobs to an external storage. Just like Tracking system, Persistence system in Dependable is also extensible. It's built with document based storage in mind. At the moment you can use SQL server based storage by using SQL server persistance extension.

### Installation via nuget

```sh
install-package dependable.extensions.persistence.sql
````

### Configuration
Once you add a reference to the package you can create the persistence table using the following helper method

```csharp
DependableJobsTable.Create("connectionstring");
```

After that change dependable configuration to use Sql persistence.

```csharp
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration()
                    .UseSqlRepositoryProvider("ConnectionStringConfigurationName", "InstanceA")
                    .CreateScheduler();
```

Second argument to ```UseSqlRepositoryProvider``` has a special purpose. Dependable relies on the fact that each scheduler has it's own storage. This could introduce problems in environments where you have a shared database for multiple systems running background jobs. You can get around this problem by specifying a unique instance name.

### Throttling and that queue length problem
Sometimes jobs we scheduler could be resource intensive and we have limited amount of resources to spare. For example, number of CPU intensive jobs you can perform simultaniously is limited to the number of cores you have. As another example, number of concurrent calls you can make to to an external service might be limited by the agreement you have with the service provider.

When configuring jobs, you can specify the maximum number of job instances that Dependable can execute at point in time. 

```csharp
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration()
                    .Job<LongRunningJob>(c => c.WithMaxWorkers(8))
                    .CreateScheduler();

```

Internally, Dependable has a queuing system to control the execution of your jobs. One potential problem with applying a throttle is that if you queue work faster than your can process them, Dependable could exhaust your memory due to increasing queue length. To get around that problem, Dependable sets the max queue length to 1000 jobs by default. As soon as it reaches this limit it will start flushing jobs to persistence system. You can control this queue length for specific jobs in the configuration.

```csharp
var scheduler = new DependableConfiguration()
                    .Job<LongRunningJob>(c => c.WithMaxQueueLength(2000))
                    .CreateScheduler();
```

## Composition
Real world job implementations can be quite significant and you may want to use composition techniques you are familiar with when building them. Dependable has extension two extension points to hook your IoC container to use all the composition goodness. 

```csharp
public interface IDependencyResolver : IDisposable
{
    IDependencyScope BeginScope();
}

public interface IDependencyScope : IDisposable
{
    object GetService(Type type);

    IEnumerable<object> GetServices(Type type);

    bool TryGetService(Type type, out object service);
}
```
